So PHP is a widely-used open-source
scripting language, we'll go back to
that later, especially to it for web
development and can be embedded into HTML.
Also, you can see how HTML appears here,
KS, something part of the definition.
By way, this definition is coming
from Wikipedia, I didn't write it.
But actually it's in a scripting
language for web development.
Typically we are talking about server-side
and it can be embedded into HTML.
This is probably the most important
number that you will see today,
PHP is used by 76% of
all the websites whose
server-side perming language we know,
76, okay?
That's a huge number, and
I'm pretty sure that if you ask young
developers about this,
they will say it's 1%, right?
Because the feeling that we have on the
web is that no one is using PHP anymore,
but it's actually the opposite.
So, of course there is a catch here, or
several catches, so
we can try to narrow this number.
First, when you look at large websites or,
the top Alexa 100
websites versus the long tail,
we see a difference there.
So, we have more PHP
penetration on the long tail,
like smaller websites than
on the bigger startups.
On the startup side, on the large
scale websites, or, I know, banks.
Social Networks,
PHP usage is lower than on the long tail,
blogs, small e-commerce websites and
so on, so it's not calibrated there.
But anyway, there are still a lot
of large websites powered by
PHP including most of the Meta websites,
Facebook and some parts of Instagram.
Wikipedia is based on PHP, and
of course they are large website in
terms of users, the use base and
of course what they're doing.
We'll talk about what Facebook has done
in the past in a few minutes, okay?
So PHP currently powers Facebook,
as I mentioned,
many parts of the Microsoft
website is actually PHP-based,
Wikipedia, and probably the 40% of
that 76% is actually WordPress.
So WordPress is the most used CMS
content management system out there, and
it's based on PHP, which also
the number 76% not actually a lie, but
it's a data that we need to
get some granular information.
So for example, that doesn't mean that
76% of the web developers are using PHP,
because there are a lot of WordPress
websites out there that are based on PHP,
but actually the owner,
the developer of that website,
never brought any PHP line code.
So they're just using WordPress, and
WordPress is based on PHP, okay?
But If you're a developer and
you need to maintain WordPress websites,
at some point, you need to get into PHP.
You need to create a theme,
you need to create the plugin,
you need to touch the WordPress code or
add something on top of that, and for
that you need PHP, so that's why we
are covering today, PHP fundamentals.
There's no show WordPress,
Drupal, Joomla, and
many others out there using PHP, and
also now going back to
the developer perspective,
Magento, symphony, Laravel, code igniter.
Those are frameworks for developers
that are using PHP behind the scenes,
actually, you write PHP
to use those frameworks.
And of course, there are a lot of jobs out
there for Laravel, CodeIgniter, and so on.
Maybe for vanilla PHP, so
PHP without any framework,
in terms of jobs,
might not be like the best scenario, but
you do have a lot of
framework based things.
So let's say that these frameworks
are kind of Express js or
Django or similar that for PHP, okay?
So they let you do their
frameworks on top of PHP to
make server-side web development easier.
Today, we will just cover the fundamentals
and we will do everything from scratch
manually, like with vanilla PHP, so
no frameworks, no libraries, okay?
This is interesting because most
people think that PHP is for
the web, but actually PHP can be used for
chat scripting, so
you can do scripting your computer.
What is scripting,
whatever, you script for
whatever you wanna do instead of
using Node or a JavaScript or Go or
Pearl Python, you can use PHP to do
something every morning in your computer.
Clean up some data, do a backup so
you can run PHP scripts completely
separated from the web.
Of course,
that being on the back end on a web server
is 99.9% of the usage of PHP these days,
okay?
And there is also some other, I actually,
during my career, I found, I think,
two or three companies actually using
this third option that we have here,
desktop applications with PHP.
I'm not sure if I've ever
heard about that, but
I got the three companies
companies doing that.
There is a kind of a framework
that is not official, but
it's kind of part of
the official things you can do.
It's PHP-JTK, where you can create desktop
applications, so forget about the web.
Desktop applications with Windows,
like with PHP,
multiplatform, by the way,
Windows, Mac, Linux.
So you create Windows, buttons, of course,
it looks like from the nineties meaning
even the image you see there, the website
in general looks like from the nineties
because it's coming from the nineties.
At that time it was kind of another way,
an alternative way,
to create multi-platform desktop
applications, compared with Java.
After that, .NET appear, but .NET wasn't
originally completely multi-platform,
so it was a way to create desktop app.
You can still make some quick,
short desktop applications
with PHP using this framework.
But yeah, it's not what we are expecting,
and also these days,
we have some crazy ideas.
So this is actually,
I wanna show you this directly in action.
This is PHP, well,
it has a retro UI, okay,
but this is a playground
to play with this.
This is PHP client-side in the browser.
So instead of writing JavaScript,
you write PHP and
it runs client-side, okay?
It's called phpwasm,
it's actually a WebAssembly interpreter
of PHP that runs in the browser,
mobile devices, desktop devices.
So it's an experiment, okay, but
no one is using it in production,
but you can even talk to the DOM.
So there are some demos here you can try,
so DOM access, for example, load.
So here you can see, this is PHP,
we'll see the code later,
but is the PHP changing some or
executing some code from PHP, okay?
Again, it's just an experiment, but
there are people that still experimenting
with PHP and
see what else can we do with PHP.
Also there is another experiment
that will let you compile,
PHP code into a web assembly module.
By the way, I'm not sure if all of
you know what web assembly is, but
it's a way that we have
in the browser this day,
client side, on every browser to
execute kind of a compiled code.
So we can compile some code from some
language, it can be C, it can be code,
it can be codling, types script,
there are a lot of languages.
You compile into a binary code and
then you can execute that binary
code from JavaScript client side.
Well, there is one compiler for
PHP, so you write PHP,
you compile that PHP and
then JavaScript can execute that PHP code.